Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman, and I'm a professor of neurobiology
and ophthalmology at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, I have the pleasure of introducing Dr. Anna Lemke.
Dr. Lemke is a psychiatrist
and the chief of the addiction medicine
dual diagnosis clinic
at Stanford University School of Medicine.
She's a psychiatrist who treats patients
struggling with addiction.
She has successfully treated patients
dealing with drug addiction, alcohol addiction,
and behavioral addictions,
such as gambling and sex addiction,
as well as other types of addiction.
In fact, during our discussion,
I learned that there are a huge range of behaviors
and substances to which people can become addicted to,
and that there is a common biological underpinning
of all those addictions.
I also learned that there's a common path
to the treatment and recovery
from essentially all addictions.
Dr. Lemke explained that to me
and explained how to think about and conceptualize
our own addictions,
as well as the addictions of other people
who are struggling to get treatment,
move through treatment,
and stay sober from their addictions.
In addition to treating patients,
Dr. Lemke is an author
and was featured in the 2020 Netflix documentary,
''The Social Dilemma.''
I'm excited to tell you that she has a new book coming out
called ''Dopamine Nation''
finding balance in the age of indulgence.
The book comes out August 24th
and is an absolutely fascinating read into addiction
and ways to treat various types of addiction.
I've read the book cover to cover.
And all I'll tell you is that at the very first chapter
and throughout, you're going to be absolutely blown away.
The stories about her patients are extremely engaging.
It brings forward the real struggle of addiction
and the incredible,
I think it's fair to say heroic battles
that people fight
in order to get through addictions of various kinds.
And all of that is woven through with story,
with science,
and ways that make it very accessible to anyone,
whether or not you have a science background or not.
I can't recommend it highly enough.
So again, the book is ''Dopamine Nation''
finding balance in the age of indulgence.
It comes out August 24th of this year, 2021.
And you can pre-order that book by going to Amazon.
We will provide a link to that in the show caption.
Before we begin,
I just want to mention that this podcast
is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.
It is however,
part of my desire and effort to bring zero cost
to consumer information about science
and science related tools to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Roca.
Roca makes sunglasses and eyeglasses
that are of the absolute utmost quality.
Founded by two all American swimmers from Stanford,
everything about the sunglasses and eyeglasses
that Roca makes was designed with performance in mind.
First of all, they're very lightweight.
You don't even really notice that they're on your face.
Second of all, even if you get sweaty, they don't slip off.
In fact, they were designed to be worn at work
or around the house,
but also if you're running or biking.
So you can move seamlessly between different activities
without having to change your sunglasses or eyeglasses.
In addition, the lenses are designed
with the science of the visual system in mind.
I've spent my career working
on the science of the visual system.
And I can tell you that it's not trivial to build a lens
that allows you to see with perfect clarity,
whether or not you're in bright sunshine
and then move into shadows,
but the Roca glasses allow you to do that.
You always see things with absolute clarity.
Another terrific thing about Roca eyeglasses and sunglasses
is the aesthetic.
A lot of so-called performance sunglasses and eyeglasses,
they're not really built with the best aesthetic
and they kind of make people look like cyborgs.
With Roca, they have a lot of different styles
to choose from, but all those styles are of the sort
that you could wear out to dinner
or to work or when engaging in physical activity.
If you'd like to try Roca glasses,
you can go to Roca, that's R-O-K-A.com
and enter the code Huberman at checkout.
And if you do that, you'll get 20% off your first order.
Today's podcast is also brought to us by Inside Tracker.
Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and reach your health goals.
I'm a big believer in getting regular blood work done.
And I've been doing that for a number of years
for the simple reason that most, if not all of the factors
that impact your immediate and long-term health
can only be analyzed in detail with a quality blood test.
And now with the advent of modern DNA tests,
you can get further insight
into what's going on beneath the hood, so to speak.
The problem with a lot of blood and DNA tests, however,
is you get numbers back,
you get the levels back of various things
and you find out if certain things are too high or too low
or right on target,
but there are no directives about how to move those numbers
in the direction that you would want them to go.
With Inside Tracker,
they have a dashboard that makes all of that very easy.
And that dashboard takes your numbers
and can help direct you
towards particular lifestyle factors, nutrition factors,
exercise, supplementation, et cetera,
that can help you bring those numbers
into the ranges that are right for you.
If you'd like to try Inside Tracker,
you can go to insidetracker.com slash Huberman.
And if you do that,
you'll get 25% off any of Inside Tracker's plans.
Just use the code Huberman at checkout.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Headspace.
Headspace is a meditation app
that's backed by 25 published peer review studies
and has over 600,000 five-star reviews.
I've been meditating for a very long time.
I'm 45 years old now, almost 46,
and I started meditating when I was about 15 years old.
The problem, however, is keeping up a meditation practice.
I've experienced this myself.
I've had periods of time where I'm meditating regularly
and then periods of time where I just kind of
fall off the rails and I'm just not doing it at all.
There's now tons of evidence,
evidence from neuroscience, evidence from psychology,
evidence from areas of biology focused on stress
and the immune system that a meditation practice,
when done regularly, is extremely beneficial
for mental and physical health
and things like focus and creativity.
However, you have to do the meditation practice.
And so if you're not doing it regularly,
that's a serious problem.
And if you are doing it regularly, great.
With Headspace, I find that I can stick
to a meditation practice very easily.
In fact, that's why I started using it
and that's why I continue to use it.
I try and get a meditation practice in every day,
but sometimes that requires
that it be a brief meditation practice.
With Headspace, they have a huge range
of different meditations of different durations.
And so that's really helpful in building
and maintaining these powerful meditation practices.
If you want to try Headspace,
you can go to headspace.com slash special offer.
And if you do that, you'll get a free one month trial
with Headspace's full library of meditations.
This is the best deal offered by Headspace.
Basically, you get access to everything they've got
completely free for a one month trial.
So if you'd like to try that,
go to headspace.com slash special offer.
And now for my discussion with Dr. Anna Lemke.
All right, great to have you here.
Thank you for having me.
I'm excited to be here.
Yeah, I have a lot of questions for you.
I and many listeners of this podcast
are obsessed with dopamine and what is dopamine?
How does it work?
We all hear that dopamine is this molecule
associated with pleasure.
I think the term dopamine hits,
like I'm getting a dopamine hit from this,
from Instagram or from likes or from praise
or from whatever is now commonly heard.
What is dopamine?
And what are maybe some things about dopamine
that most people don't know
and probably that I don't know either?
So dopamine is a neurotransmitter
and neurotransmitters are those molecules
that bridge the gap between two neurons.
So they essentially allow one neuron,
the presynaptic neuron to communicate
with the postsynaptic neuron.
Dopamine is intimately associated
with the experience of reward, but also with movement,
which I think is really interesting
because movement and reward are linked, right?
If you think about early humans,
you had to move in order to go seek out the water
or the meat or whatever it was.
And even in the most primitive organisms,
dopamine is released when food is sensed in the environment,
for example, sea elegance, a very primitive worm.
So dopamine is this really powerful,
important molecule in the brain
that helps us experience pleasure.
It's not the only neurotransmitter involved in pleasure,
but it's a really, really important one.
And if you want to think about something
that most people don't know about dopamine,
which I think is really interesting
is that we are always releasing dopamine
at a kind of tonic baseline rate.
And it's really the deviation from that baseline
rather than like hits of dopamine in a vacuum
that make a difference.
So when we experience pleasure,
our dopamine release goes above baseline.
And likewise, dopamine can go below that tonic baseline,
and then we experience a kind of pain.
Interesting.
So is it fair to say that one's baseline levels of dopamine,
how frequently we are releasing dopamine
in the absence of some, I don't know, drug or food
or experience just sitting, being,
is that associated with how happy somebody is,
their kind of baseline of happiness or level of depression?
There is evidence that shows that people who are depressed
may indeed have lower tonic levels of dopamine.
So that's a really reasonable thought.
And there's some evidence to suggest that that may be true.
The other thing that we know,
and this is really kind of what the book is about,
is that if we expose ourselves chronically
to substances or behaviors
that repeatedly release large amounts of dopamine
in our brain's reward pathway,
that we can change our tonic baseline
and actually lower it over time
as our brain tries to compensate for all of that dopamine,
which is more really than we were designed to experience.
Interesting.
And is it the case that our baseline levels of dopamine
are set by our genetics, by our heredity?
Well, I think if you think about
sort of the early stages of development in infancy,
certainly that is true.
You're kind of born with probably
whatever is your baseline level,
but obviously your experiences can have a huge impact
on where your dopamine level ultimately settles out.
So if somebody's disposition
is one of constant excitement and anticipation
or easily excited,
these are, I think, about the kind of people where you say,
hey, do you want to check out this new place for tacos?
And they're like, yeah, that'd be great.
And other people are a little more cynical,
harder to budge, like my bulldog Costello.
Very, very stable low levels of dopamine
with big inflections in his case.
Do you think that's set in terms of our parents
and obviously nature and nurture interact,
but is dopamine at the core of our temperament?
I don't really think we know the answer to that,
but I will say that people are definitely born
with different temperaments
and those temperaments do affect their ability
to experience joy.
And we've known that for a long time
and we describe that in many different ways.
One of the ways that we describe that in the modern era
is to use psychiatric nomenclature,
like this person has a dysthymic temperament,
or this person has chronic major depressive disorder.
In terms of looking specifically
at who's vulnerable to addiction,
that's an interesting sort of mixed bag,
because when you look at the research
on risk factors for addiction,
so what kind of temperament of a person
makes them more vulnerable to addiction,
you see some interesting findings.
First, you see that people who are more impulsive
are more vulnerable to addiction.
So what is impulsivity?
That means having difficulty putting space
between the thought or desire to do something
and actually doing it.
And people who have difficulty putting a space there
or who have a thought to do something
and just do it impulsively
are people who are more vulnerable to addiction.
Interesting.
In terms of impulsivity,
is this something that relates literally
to the startle reflex?
Like I've, for instance, as a lab director,
I'm familiar with walking around my lab
and when I decide, deciding I'm going to talk to my people,
of course, when they knock on my door,
it's always like, wait, why am I being bothered right now?
Even though I love to talk to them,
but I walk around my lab from time to time
and some people I notice I'll say, do you have a moment?
And they'll slowly turn around and say, yeah, or no,
in some cases.
And other people will jump the moment I say their name.
They actually have a kind of a heightened startle reflex.
Is that related to impulsivity
or is what you're referring to an attempt
to withhold behavior that's very deliberate
under very deliberate conditions?
Yeah, so I don't think that that startle reflex
is necessarily related to impulsivity.
That can be related to anxiety.
So people who are high anxiety,
people will tend to have more of a startle reflex.
Impulsivity is a little bit different.
And by the way, impulsivity is not always bad, right?
Impulsivity is that thing where there's not a lot
of self editing or worrying about future consequences.
You know, you have the idea to do something and you do it.
And of course we can imagine many scenarios
where that's absolutely wonderful.
You know, there can be a sort of, let's say,
intimate interactions between people
where you wouldn't really want to be super inhibited
about it, right?
You would want to be disinhibited and impulsive.
I can also like imagine like sort of fight or flight
scenarios, like battle scenarios, right?
Where it would really be good to be impulsive
and just go, rah, you know, just go.
Where hesitation can cost you your life.
Yes, that's right, that's right.
But you know, and I think this brings up a really,
something that I've come to believe after 25 years
of practicing psychiatry is that what we now conceptualize
in our current ecosystem as mental illness
are actually traits that in another ecosystem
might be very advantageous.
They're just not advantageous right now
because of the world that we live in.
And I think, you know, impulsivity is potentially
one of those, right?
Because we live in this world that's sort of like,
you have to constantly be thinking sort of rationally
about the consequences of X, Y, or Z.
And it's such a sensory rich environment, right?
That we're being bombarded with all of these opportunities,
these sensory opportunities.
And we have to constantly check ourselves.
And so impulsivity is something that right now
can be a difficult trait,
but isn't in and of itself a bad thing.
I see. Yeah.
Yeah, and it's, I'm beginning to realize
it's a fine line between spontaneity and impulsivity.
Yeah.
What is pleasure and how does it work
at the biological level and if it feels right
at the psychological level?
I think we, and if you don't mind painting a picture
of sort of the range of things that you have observed
in your clinic or in life that people
can become addicted to.
But just to start off really simply,
what is this thing that we call pleasure?
Well, I think it's actually really hard to define pleasure
in any kind of succinct way,
because certainly there is the seeking out
of a high or a euphoria,
or I think the kind of experience
that most anybody would associate with the word pleasure.
But also the seeking out of those same substances
and behaviors is often a way to escape pain.
So for example, when I talk to people with addiction,
sometimes their initial foray into using a drug
is to get pleasure, but very often it's a way
to escape their suffering, whatever their suffering may be.
And certainly as people become addicted,
even those who initially were seeking out pleasure
are ultimately just trying to avoid the pain of withdrawal
or the pain of the consequences of their drug use.
So I think it's very hard to actually define it
as this unitary thing.
And it's certainly not just getting a high.
There are so many ways in which people sort of want
to escape, which is not the same thing
as sort of this hedonic wanting to feel pleasure.
So someone could decide that they want to go out and dance
or get up and dance because of the pleasure of dancing.
I can imagine that.
And maybe it's very difficult for them to stay seated
when a particular song comes on, for instance.
But seeking what we would call pleasure
in order to eliminate pain,
that evokes a different picture in my mind.
That evokes a picture of somebody that feels lost
or depressed or underwhelmed.
I definitely want to get into the precise
and general description of addiction and what that is,
but in a previous conversation we had,
you said something that really rung in my mind,
which is that many people who become addicted to things,
let's call them addicts,
have this feeling that normal life isn't interesting enough,
that they are seeking a super normal experience
and that the day-to-day routine balance,
which is actually in the title of your book,
"'Dopamine Nation, Finding Balance
"'in the Age of Indulgence,'"
that the word balance itself can sometimes
be a bit of an aversive term for people.
And I'm struck by this idea,
and the reason I want to explore it is
because so much of what I see online
is about generating a lack of balance,
about being tilted forward at all times,
really leaning into life hard, experiencing life,
living a full life.
Even the commencement speech given by Steve Jobs
on this campus was really about finding passion,
digging, you know, there's so much in the narrative now.
So maybe you could just tell us a little bit
about your experience with this association,
if it really exists, between people's sense of the normalcy
or maybe even how boring life can be
and their tendency to become addicts of some sort.
Yeah, well, I mean, I think that life
for humans has always been hard,
but I think that now it's harder in unprecedented ways.
And I think that the way that life is really hard now
is that it actually is really boring.
And the reason that it's boring is
because all of our survival needs are met, right?
I mean, we don't even have to leave our homes
to meet every single physical need.
You know, as long as you're of a certain level
of financial wellbeing, which frankly, you know,
we talk so much about, you know, the income gap,
and certainly there is this enormous gap
between rich and poor, but that gap is smaller
than it's ever been in like the history of humans.
Even the poorest of the poor have more excess income
to spend on leisure goods
than they ever have before in human history.
If you look at leisure time, for example,
so people without a high school education
have 42% more leisure time than people with a college degree.
So my point here is that life is hard now
in this really weird way,
in that we don't really have anything that we have to do.
So we're all forced to make stuff up, you know,
whether it's being a scientist or being a doctor
or being an Olympic athlete or, you know,
climbing Mount Everest,
and people really vary in their need for friction.
And some people need a lot more than others.
And if they don't have it, they're really, really unhappy.
And I do think that a lot of the people that I see
with addiction and other forms of mental illness
are people who need more friction.
Like they're unhappy,
not necessarily because there's something wrong
with their brain,
but because their brain is not suited to this world.
And do you think they have that sense,
my brain isn't suited to this world,
or they simply feel a restlessness
and they're constantly seeking stimulation?
I think that's right.
Yeah, I think it's not really knowing what's wrong with me,
and why am I unhappy?
How can I be happier?
And of course, as you talk about,
what's so pervasive in our narrative now
is like find your passion, you know,
find your, you know, whatever it is to save the world.
And in a way that's good,
because it has people out in the world and seeking,
but in a way it can also be misleading
in the sense that I think people aren't entirely aware
that the world is a hard place and that life is hard
and that, you know, like we're all kind of making it up.
Do you know what I mean?
Yeah, well, there's a book by Cal Newport.
I don't know if you know Cal Newport's work,
but you guys are very symbiotic in your messages.
He's a professor of computer science at Georgetown.
Yes, at Georgetown.
And wrote a book some years ago,
really ahead of its time,
called So Good They Can't Ignore You,
which is about not meditating or doing much work
to try and figure out what one's passion is by thinking,
but rather go out and acquire skills
and develop a sense of passion for something
by your experience of hard work
and getting better and feedback.
A little bit of the growth mindset thing
of our colleague, Carol Dweck.
But he's gone on to write books, Deep Work,
which is all about removing yourself from technology
and doing deep work.
And he's been a big proponent of the evils of context
switching too often throughout the day
for sake of productivity, mostly.
His new book is called A World Without Email.
I'm beginning to realize as I cite off these books
in your book, Dopamine Nation,
Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence,
that maybe the reason why you two don't know
about one another is because neither of you
are on social media.
That's it, that's it.
Right, and yet you're two of the most productive people
that I know, including productive authors.
So that's a discussion unto itself.
But I find this fascinating.
So let's talk about the pleasure,
pain, balance, and addiction.
And I've heard you use this seesaw
or balance scale analogy before.
And I think it's a wonderful one
that really, for me, clarified what addiction is,
at least at the mechanistic level.
Yeah, so to me, one of the most significant findings
in neuroscience in the last 75 years
is that pleasure and pain are co-located,
which means the same parts of the brain
that process pleasure also process pain.
And they work like a balance.
So when we feel pleasure, our balance tips one way.
When we feel pain, it tips in the opposite direction.
And one of the overriding rules governing this balance
is that it wants to stay level.
So it doesn't want to remain tipped very long
to pleasure or to pain.
And with any deviation from neutrality,
the brain will work very hard to restore a level balance
or what scientists call homeostasis.
And the way the brain does that
is with any stimulus to one side,
there will be a tip an equal and opposite amount
to the other side.
It's like you have principle laws of physics.
Yes, right, right.
So I like to watch YouTube videos.
When I watch YouTube videos of American Idol,
it tips to the side of pleasure.
And then when I stop watching it, I have a comedown, right,
which is a tip to the equal and opposite amount
on the other side.
And that's that moment of wanting to watch
one more YouTube video, right?
Yeah, and I just want to interject there.
So this moment of wanting to watch another
that is associated with pain, I think,
is are we always aware of that happening?
Because you just described it in a very conscious way.
But when I indulge in something I enjoy,
I'm usually thinking about just wanting more of that thing.
I don't think about the pain, I just think about more.
Right, so really excellent point,
because we're mostly not aware of it.
And it's also reflexive.
So it's not something that consciously happens
or that we're aware of
unless we really begin to pay attention.
And when we begin to pay attention,
we really can become very aware of it in the moment.
Again, it's like a falling away,
like you're on social media and you get a good tweet
of something and then you can't stop yourself
because there's this awareness, a latent awareness
that as soon as I disengage from this behavior,
I'm going to experience a kind of a pain, right?
A falling away, a missing that feeling,
a wanting more of it.
And of course, one way to combat that is to do it more,
right, and more and more and more.
So I think that is really what I want people to tune into
and get an awareness around,
because once you tune into it, you can see it a lot.
And then when you begin to see it, you have,
and if you keep the model of the balance in mind,
I think it gives people kind of a way to imagine
what they're experiencing on a neurobiological level
and understand it.
And in that understanding, get some mastery over it,
which is really what this is all about.
Because ultimately we do need to disengage, right?
We can't live in that space all the time, right?
We have other things we need to do.
And there are also serious consequences that come
with trying to repeat and continue that experience
or that feeling.
Yeah, so if I understand this correctly,
when we find something or when something finds us
that we enjoy, that feels pleasureful,
social media, food, sex, gambling, whatever happens to be,
and we will explore the full range of these,
there's some dopamine release when we engage
in that behavior.
And then what you're telling me is that very quickly
and beneath my conscious awareness,
there's a tilting back of the scale
where pleasure is reduced by way of increasing pain.
And I've heard you say before that the pain mechanism
has some competitive advantages over the pleasure mechanism
such that it doesn't just bring the scale back to level.
It actually brings pain higher than pleasure.
Could you tell us a little bit more about that?
Yeah, yeah, so what happens again,
so the hallmark of any addictive substance or behavior
is that it releases a lot of dopamine
in our brain's reward pathway, right?
Like broccoli just doesn't release a lot of dopamine,
just doesn't, right?
I'm trying to imagine.
I was about to say maybe, and I stopped myself
because no, broccoli is good.
It can be really good, but broccoli is never amazing.
Right, broccoli is never amazing.
This is the most amazing broccoli.
Honestly, we can probably find somebody on the planet
for whom broccoli is amazing.
And of course, if I'm starving, broccoli is amazing.
Rich Roll, Rich Roll is big on plants
and he has a good relationship to plants, Rich,
tell us how to make broccoli amazing.
If anyone could do it, it'd be rich.
Yeah, yeah.
But what happens right after I do something
that is really pleasurable and releases a lot of dopamine
is again, my brain is going to immediately compensate
by down-regulating my own dopamine receptors,
my own dopamine transmission to compensate for that, okay?
And that's that come down or the hangover,
that after effect, that moment of wanting to do it more.
Now, if I just wait for that feeling to pass,
then my dopamine will re-regulate itself
and I'll go back to whatever my chronic baseline is.
But if I don't wait, and here's really the key,
if I keep indulging again and again and again,
ultimately, I have so much on the pain side, right,
that I've essentially reset my brain
to what we call like an anhedonic
or lacking in joy type of state,
which is a dopamine deficit state.
So that's really the way in which pain
can become the main driver is because I've indulged so much
in these high reward behaviors or substances
that my brain has had to compensate
by way down-regulating my own dopamine,
such that even when I'm not doing that drug,
I'm in a dopamine deficit state,
which is akin to a clinical depression.
I have anxiety, irritability, insomnia, dysphoria,
and a lot of mental preoccupation with using again
or getting the drug.
And so that's the piece there.
There's the single use, which easily passes,
but it's the chronic use that can then reset
really our dopamine thresholds.
And then nothing is enjoyable, right?
Then everything sort of pales in comparison
to this one drug that I want to keep doing.
And that one drug could be a person, right?
I mean, I know people in my life
that are still talking about this one relationship,
this one person that was just so great
despite all the challenges of that thing,
that it's almost like they're addicted to the narrative.
They were maybe or still are addicted to the person.
So it could be to any number of things,
video games, sex, gambling, a person, a narrative.
To me, and because of the way you describe this mechanism,
this pleasure-pain balance,
that all speaks to the kind of generalizability
of our brain circuitry.
And this is something that fascinates me,
and I know it fascinates you as well,
which is that nature did not evolve
20 different mechanisms for 20 different types of addiction.
Just like anxiety is a couple of core sets of hormones
and neurotransmitters and pathways,
and one person is triggered by social interactions,
another person is triggered by spiders,
but the underlying response is identical.
It sounds like with addiction as well,
there may be some nuance,
but that they're sort of a core set of processes.
So it doesn't really matter
if it's gambling or video games or sex
or a narrative about a previous lover or partner or whatever.
It's the same addictive process underneath that.
Is that correct?
Yes, exactly.
And that's where this whole idea of cross addiction comes in.
So once you've been addicted to a substance,
severely addicted, that makes you more vulnerable
to addiction to any substance.
And when you say substance,
does the same, is what you just said
also true for behaviors?
Yes, so when I use the word drug,
I'm talking about substances and behaviors, really,
and I'm talking about behaviors like gambling, sex,
gaming, porn, absolutely, shopping, work.
You've accused me, just for the record,
Anna, Dr. Lemke has accused me, not accused me,
has diagnosed me outside the clinic
in a playful way of being work addicted.
You're probably right.
The first thoughts I have when I wake up
are typically about work,
certainly within 50 milliseconds or so of waking.
And probably the last thoughts I have,
I would hope, are not about work,
but yeah, I work constantly.
I don't, I do other things,
but I have to actively turn that off.
Yes, that's exactly right.
And you're certainly not alone in that.
And of course-
At Stanford, no, no, no, no.
Right, I mean, here in Silicon Valley,
it's highly rewarded, right?
So that kind of addiction-
It's embedded in the culture.
Oh, yeah, absolutely, yeah.
And there's this other city, I think it's called New York,
where they also work a lot out here,
and it's heavily rewarded.
I once said, and I'm sure
that I'm not the first person to say it,
but I was thinking about addiction,
and I was thinking about the underlying circuits,
and I posted something to social media,
which said that addiction is a progressive narrowing
of the things that bring you pleasure.
That was the way that I kind of crystallized
the literature in my mind.
And then we met, and you of course came
and gave these amazing lectures in the neuroanatomy course
for the medical students, and the rest is history.
But I tossed out a kind of mirroring statement
for that as well, which was a bit overstepping, I admit,
which I said, addiction is a progressive narrowing
of the things that bring you pleasure.
And I said, dare I say, enlightenment is a progressive
expansion of the things that bring you pleasure.
Not that anybody knows what enlightenment is,
but it was my attempt to take a little bit of a jab
at the fact that nobody knows,
and so why wouldn't I throw a neurobiological explanation,
just to kind of sample the waters?
And people had varying levels of response.
But the reason I bring that up is that I would imagine
that being able to derive pleasure from many things
would be a wonderful attribute.
Well, you know people like this that can experience pleasure
in little things and in big events,
not just the big milestones of life, but also the subtle,
as the yogis would say, the subtle ripples of life.
If such an ability exists, do you think that that reflects
a healthily tuned dopamine system,
one that can engage and enjoy, but then disengage?
Is that what we should be seeking?
And to underscore, I know nothing about enlightenment
meditation or any of it.
I just use these as opportunities to explore.
Yeah, so it's a great question.
And I understand the question as,
so what should we be striving for, right?
Where should we settle out?
And in my book, I really hold out people in recovery
from severe addiction as sort of modern day profits
for the rest of us.
Because I do think that people who have been addicted
and then get into recovery do have a hard-won wisdom
that we can all benefit from.
And the wisdom, I guess, to distill it down,
I mean, it's many things.
But in terms of dopamine, the wisdom is there are adaptive
ways to get your dopamine,
and there are less than adaptive ways.
And in general, you could describe the adaptive ways
as not too potent, so not tipping that balance too hard
or too fast to the side of pleasure.
So does that mean never allowing myself
to be absolutely in complete bliss?
Or does it mean not allowing myself
to stay in that state too long?
The latter, I think the latter.
So, and then that gets to temperament.
So I'm going to get that to a second.
So in general, what we want is some kind of flexibility
in that balance and the ability
to easily reassert homeostasis.
We don't want to break our balance,
which is possible if we overindulge
for enough period of time and end up with a balance tip
to the side of pain, this dopamine deficit state
we've been talking about.
We want a flexible, resilient balance, right?
Which can be sensitive to things going on in the environment
which can experience pleasure and approach,
which can experience pain and recoil, right?
This is all adaptive and healthy and necessary and good.
We would never want a balance that doesn't tilt.
That would be a disaster, but we wouldn't be human.
And we wouldn't want that, it'd be really, really boring.
On the other hand, what people in recovery
from addiction talk about is, to some extent,
having to learn to live with things
being a little boring a lot of the time, right?
So trying to avoid some of this intensity
and thrill-seeking and escapism
that really is at the core of addictive tendencies.
Sorry to interrupt, but when you say boring,
can we add stressful and boring?
Yes.
Because there are days where I'm not,
I'm one of these people I have to remind myself to have fun
because I sort of forgot what the term means
because I like to think that I experience
a lot of pleasure in little things,
but I'm a pretty hard driving guy.
I like goals and big milestones, all that stuff.
Anyway, the point being that many days,
I'm not bored thinking, oh, there's nothing to do,
but I am kind of overwhelmed by the number of things
that are really not pleasureful that I have to do.
I won't mention what they are
because I don't want my colleagues to be like,
so that's why you don't respond to emails.
No, just your emails.
Not yours, Anna, but theirs.
In any event, so anxiety and boredom
can hang out together, right?
Am I correct in-
Oh, for sure.
I mean, actually boredom is highly anxiety-provoking.
Okay, that's good to know
because I think people hear boredom
and they think like, oh, there's nothing to do here.
I feel like we have a ton to do.
We just don't really want to do it
as opposed to something that we're excited to do.
Right, okay, so this gets to sort of
some of the core things also we were talking about earlier
about finding your passion.
So I'm going to try to link it all together.
But basically, is boredom,
first of all, boredom is a rare experience for modern humans
because we're constantly distracting ourselves
from the present moment
and we have an infinite number of ways to do that, right?
But boredom is really, I think,
an important and necessary experience.
But it is scary
because when you allow yourself to be bored,
let's say you had that list of all the things you hate to do
and you actually got them all done.
Imagine that, and you got your forthcoming book done,
and you did all your interviews, and then-
It could happen.
Lightning could spread. Right.
And you walked your dog and you cleaned your house
and you went shopping.
Imagine that for a moment.
You would be sitting in your house
and my guess is you would be terrified
because, wow, what am I supposed to do now? Right?
There's nothing I really have to do.
And that is really, really scary.
That can feel like free fall.
And yet that's really an important
and good experience to have.
And I think that is an experience
out of which we can have a lot of creative initiative,
but also really consider our priorities and values.
Okay, here I am on planet earth.
What the hee-haw am I going to do with my life?
What do I really care about?
How do I really want to spend my time
when I'm not distracting myself in order to spend it?
And then this gets back to our conversation
a little bit earlier about finding your passion.
So I think that one of the big problems now
that's very misguided about this idea
of finding your passion,
it's almost as if people are looking to fit the key
into the lock of the thing that was meant for them to do.
Right, and then everything will feel
like a natural progression.
Right, and then everything will be wonderful.
I can attest to the fact that is not how it works
in any endeavor.
Right, and that you'll have all this great success.
And here's where I really think the answer lies,
and I really, really believe this.
Stop looking for your passion,
and instead look around right where you are.
Stop distracting yourself.
Look around right where you are,
and see what needs to be done.
So not what do I want to do,
but what is the work that needs to be done?
And more importantly,
it doesn't have to be some grandiose work.
Like, does the garbage need to be taken out, right?
Is there some garbage on your neighbor's lawn
that someone threw there
that you could actually bend over and pick up
and put into the garbage can?
Look around you.
There is so much work that needs to be done
that nobody wants to do that is really, really important.
And if we all did that,
I really think the world would be a much better place.
And this is what people who have severe addiction
who get into recovery realize.
They're like, it's not about me and my will
and what I'm going to will in my life or in the world.
It's about looking around what needs to be done.
What is the work that I am called to do in this moment?
Which also is incredibly freeing
because I don't have to search for the perfect thing.
There's a lot of burden now on young people
that they have to find that perfect thing.
And until they've found that perfect thing,
they're going to be miserable.
You don't have to do that.
Look at the life you were given.
Look at the people around you.
Look at the jobs that present themselves to you
and do that job simply and honorably one day at a time.
With a kind of humility.
I think this is really what's so striking to me
about the wisdom of people in recovery.
There's this incredible humility
that comes out of that experience.
You feel so broken, so ashamed,
but you pick yourself up one day at a time
and you build a life that's around what can I do
right in this moment that might benefit another person
and thereby benefit me.
And it's a really important point and if you're willing,
I'd like to actually stay on this issue of passion
because I think the dopamine systems,
if I understand them correctly,
the dopamine systems merge with this work
that you're referring to,
this immediacy of things calling to us
like taking out the trash,
which sounds frankly really boring to be honest.
I hate taking out the trash, but I do it
because I like a clean home
and I like a home that smells good
or at least doesn't smell bad.
So we do these things and not that we want to offer
some larger carrot as a consequence of doing those things,
but if I understand correctly, what you're saying is
in the act of looking at one's immediate environment,
acting on that immediate environment,
we cultivate a relationship to these circuits in our brain
about action and reward that at least to my mind,
span the range of small things being rewarding
and then lead us to bigger things being rewarding.
It's not like all we're going to do is take out trash
and tend to house.
We eventually will venture out
and we eventually will find careers and work on those.
But if I understand correctly,
you're talking about getting into a sort of functional
or adaptive action step.
And it's the action step that these days we tend to overlook
because most of our mindset is in things
that are truly outside of our immediate reality.
Do I have that correct?
Yeah, that was beautifully said.
And I would just add to that.
I see a lot of young people who, for example,
spend most of their waking hours playing video games
and they come to me and they say,
I'm anxious and depressed.
I'm majoring in computer science.
I hate it.
I thought I would like it.
If I could only find that thing
that I was really meant to do, my life would be better.
And my first intervention for the many, many people like that
that I see in clinical care is you have it backwards.
I don't say it quite like that.
You were waiting for that thing to pull you out
of the video game world and you're never going to find it
as long as you're playing video games.
Because video games are so powerfully dopaminergic
that you have this distorted sense of really pleasure
and pain, and you will not be able to find that thing
that you enjoy.
And so of course the intervention is abstain
from video games, reset your reward pathways,
start with a level balance.
And what invariably happens, and I've just seen it
over 20 years, so many times,
I've become really a believer in this.
All of a sudden it's like, oh wow,
my computer science class is interesting this quarter.
It's like, okay, you have a receptivity then
to experiencing pleasure and reward in a way
you just don't have when you're bombarding
your reward pathways with these high dopamine drugs.
Very interesting.
And just to underscore this notion that tending
to the immediate things can lead to super performance.
I may have mentioned it earlier this episode,
but if I didn't, I'll mention it now,
which is I have the great privilege of having
some close friends that were in the SEAL teams
and doing some work with those communities.
And it's a remarkable community for reasons
that I think most people don't understand.
People think they see the images carrying logs
down the beach and all the blowing stuff out,
all the stuff that's fun for guys like that.
But all of the guys I know who are in the SEAL teams
have this sense of duty about immediate things
and not just holding the door and helping with the dishes
and moving things around.
They are constantly scanning their environment
for what can be done.
They essentially conquer every environment they're in.
They are also some of the most competitive human beings
in the world.
And they do it unless they're in the act of war fighting,
which is their real job.
They do it in every environment in a very benevolent way.
And it's a remarkable thing because I think it's what
is part of what they're selected for.
And there's a range there.
But I think when we hear about tending
to the immediate things or this phrase,
how you do one thing is how you do anything.
That's a tricky one for me because there are certain things
I just don't do well.
But should we always be trying?
I think that the tending to setting the horizon in closely
and tending to things in one's immediate environment,
I think it is very powerful and translates.
Because again, I think the nervous system,
it performs algorithms, it has action steps.
The brain doesn't evolve to do one thing.
It evolves to be able to use the same approach
to doing lots of different things.
I just want to add, so even beyond that,
because that totally resonates for me
and is very consistent with people in recovery
from addiction who learn to take it one day at a time,
which is one of the standard lingo
from Alcoholics Anonymous and other 12 step groups.
But I think also, as you say,
our brain is really wired for the 24 hour period.
We're not very good at sort of the 10 year, 20.
I mean, we have these huge frontal lobes
and yes, we're great planners and we can.
But if we live too much in that space,
we can really get very anxious and depressed and lost
and either catastrophize or get grandiose.
But if you can chunk it down to a day,
what people in recovery talk about
is how if I can just do today right,
then I will get a chain of days
that seem insignificant in their individual units.
But after six months or a year
or two years of those good days,
I've got two very good years, right?
And I look back and it's like, oh wow,
well, I guess I did all that.
But I think that's really one of the keys
is really taking it one day at a time,
which your seals and also this connecting
with the environment, right?
So being awake and alert to your environment
and connecting with your environment,
not trying to escape it.
And of course, escapism is what we all want and desire,
that experience of non-being.
And we get it from the internet or from drugs
or whatever it is, but it's the booby prize
because ultimately it takes you further and further away
from your immediate environment,
which is where we really have to connect
to get that sense of groundedness and authenticity
and like of being in our own lives.
Well, I think the unit of the day
is something that comes up again and again
of in my discussions with colleagues
who are extremely successful
and who also have balanced lives.
This actually came up in the discussion
with Karl Deisseroth, who is also a successful scientist
and clinician and manages a family, et cetera.
So the unit of the day I think is fundamental
and those stack up as you mentioned.
So along those lines, I've heard you say
that in order to reset the dopamine system,
essentially in order to break an addictive pattern,
to become unaddicted, 30 days of zero interaction
with that substance, that person, et cetera.
Is that correct?
Yeah, and 30 days is in my clinical experience,
the average amount of time it takes
for the brain to reset reward pathways
for dopamine transmission to regenerate itself.
There's also a little bit of science
that suggests that that's true.
Some imaging studies showing that our brains
are still in a dopamine deficit state two weeks
after we've been using our drug.
And then a study by Shuckett and Brown,
which took a group of depressed men
who also were addicted to alcohol,
put them in a hospital where they had received
no treatment for depression,
but they had no access to alcohol in that time.
And after four weeks, 80% of them no longer met criteria
for major depression.
So again, this idea that by depriving ourselves
of this high dopamine, high reward substance or behavior,
we allow our brains to regenerate its own dopamine
for the balance to really correlate,
and then we're in a place where we can
sort of enjoy other things.
So that progressive narrowing
of what brings one pleasure eventually expands.
So I'd like to dissect out that 30 days a little more,
finally, and I also want to address
how does one stop doing something for 30 days
if the thing is a thought?
So we'll kind of put that on the shelf for the moment.
So days one through 10,
I would imagine will be very uncomfortable.
They're going to suck, basically, to be quite honest,
because the way you describe this pleasure pain balance,
to my mind says that if you remove
what little pleasure one is getting,
or a lot of pleasure from engaging in some behavior,
that's gone, the pain system is really ramped up,
and nothing is making me feel good.
I'll just use myself as an example.
I'm not in recovery,
but that 10 days is going to be miserable.
Anxiety, trouble sleeping, physical agitation
and to the point where maybe impulsive, angry,
should one expect all of that?
Should the family members of people expect all of that?
Yeah, so what I say to patients,
and it's a really important piece of this intervention,
is that you will feel worse before you feel better.
For how long?
Yeah.
This is probably the first question they ask, right?
And I say, usually in my clinical experience,
you'll feel worse for two weeks,
but if you can make it through those first two weeks,
the sun will start to come out in week three,
and by week four,
most people are feeling a whole lot better than they were
before they stopped using their substance.
So yeah, you have to, it's a hard thing.
Like you have to sign up for it.
And I will say, obviously,
there are people with addictions that are so severe
that as long as they have access to their drug or behavior,
they're not able to stop themselves.
And that's why we have higher levels of care
or residential treatment.
So this is not going to be for everybody, this intervention,
but it's amazing how many people
with really severe addictions to things like heroin,
cocaine, very severe pornography addictions.
I posit this, and I do it as an experiment.
I said, you know what, let's try this experiment.
I'm always amazed, number one,
how many of them are willing,
and number two, how many of them are actually able to do it?
They are able to do it.
And so that little nudge is sort of just what they need.
And the carrot is, there's a better life out there for you,
and you'll be able to taste it in a month.
You really will be able to begin to see
that you can feel better and that there's another way.
So the way you describe it seems like it's hard,
but it's doable for most people, not everybody.
And we'll return to that category
of people who can't do that on their own.
Well, then days 21 through 30, people are feeling better.
The sun is starting to come out, as you mentioned,
which translates in the narrative we've created here
and supported by biology,
that dopamine is starting to be released in response
to the taste of a really good cup of coffee, for instance.
Yes, exactly.
Whereas before it was only to insert addictive behavior.
Right, that's right.
Whichever it happens to.
Of course, coffee can be addictive too,
but we'll leave that aside.
Yeah, I feel like coffee
has a kind of consumption limiting mechanism built in
where at some point you just can't ingest anymore.
Yeah.
But maybe that's wrong.
Sorry to give lift to the caffeine addicts out there
as I clutch my mug.
So days 21 through 30.
I've seen a lot of people go through addiction
and addiction treatment.
I've spent a lot of time in those places, actually,
looking at it, researching.
I've got friends in that community.
I'm close with that community.
One thing I've seen over and over again,
sadly, often in the same individuals,
is they get sober from whatever.
They're doing great.
These are people with families.
These are people that you discard your normal image
of an addict and insert the most normal, typical,
whatever healthy person you can imagine
because a lot of these people you wouldn't know were addicts.
And then all of a sudden you get this call.
So-and-so is back in jail, so-and-so's wife
is going to leave him because he drank two bottles of wine
and took a Xanax at 7 a.m., crashed his truck into a pole.
It's got two beautiful kids.
How did this happen again?
To the point where by the fourth and fifth time,
people are just done.
I mean, maybe people,
you might be able to detect the frustration in my voice.
I'm dealing with this with somebody that's like,
I don't even know that I want to help this time.
It's been so many times.
To the point where I'm starting to wonder,
is this person just an addict?
This is just kind of what they do and who they are.
And you never want to give up on people,
but, and I'm hanging in there for them,
but I will say that many people have given up on them.
And so what I'd like to talk about in this context is
what sorts of things help other people
that we know that are addicted?
What really helps?
Like not what could help, but what really helps.
And are there certain people for whom it's hopeless?
I mean, I don't like to hold the conversation that way,
but I wouldn't be close to the real life data
if I didn't ask, is it hopeless?
Are there people who just will not be able
to quit their substance use or their addictive behavior,
despite, I have to assume, really wanting to?
Yeah, so there are people who will die
of their disease of addiction.
And I think conceptualizing it as a disease
is a helpful frame.
There are other frames that we could use,
but I do think given the brain physiologic changes
that occur with sustained heavy drug use
and what we know happens to the brain,
it is really reasonable to think of it as a brain disease.
And for me, the real window of, let's say,
being able to access my compassion
around people who are repeat relapses
even when their life is so much better,
when they're in recovery.
Yeah, it's like a no-brainer, right?
Is to conceptualize this balance
and the dopamine deficit state
and a balance tilted to the side of pain.
And to imagine that for some people,
after a month or six months, or maybe even six years,
their balance is still tipped to the side of pain,
that on some level, that balance has lost its resilience
and its ability to restore homeostasis.
It's almost like the hinge on that balance is messed up.
Exactly, and so, I mean,
for someone who's never experienced addiction like yourself,
maybe one way to conceptualize it is-
Well, I didn't say that.
Oh, okay.
No, I was not, to be clear, I was not referring to myself,
but in this example I was given,
if I were, I would come clean, I would reveal that.
But I think that especially after hearing
some of your lectures and descriptions
of the range of things that are addictive,
I think I've been fortunate
I don't have a propensity for drugs or alcohol.
I'm lucky in that way that, frankly,
if they remove all the alcohol from the planet,
I'll just be relieved because no one will offer it to me.
So don't send me any alcohol, it won't go to me.
But I don't have that,
I like to think I have the compassion,
but I don't have that empathy
for taking a really good situation
and what from the outside looks to be throwing it
in the trash.
Yeah, so okay, so is that, let me,
and this is really, I think, important
because I also had to come to an understanding of this
and I feel that I have in my 20 years
of seeing these patients.
And of course, addiction is a spectrum disease, right?
And so you've got the severe end of things.
Imagine that you had an itch somewhere on your body, okay?
And it was, I mean, we've all had that,
like whatever the source, it was super, super itchy.
You can go for, if you really focus,
you could go for a pretty good amount of time
not scratching it, but the moment you stopped focusing
on not scratching it, you would scratch it.
And maybe you do it while you were asleep, right?
And that is what happens to people with severe addiction.
That balance is essentially broken.
Homeostasis does not get restored
despite sustained abstinence.
They're living with that constant specter of that pull.
It never goes away.
So let me say, there are lots of people with addiction
for whom that does go away.
And it goes away at four weeks for many of them.
But in severe cases, that's always there and it's lingering.
And it's the moment when they're not focusing on not using,
it's like a reflex, they fall back into it.
It's not purposeful.
It's not because they wanna get high.
It's not because they value using drugs
more than they do their family.
None of that, it's that really they cannot not do it
when given the opportunity and that moment
when they're not thinking about it.
Does that make sense?
That's a great description.
And actually in that description,
I can feel a bit of empathy
because the way you described
scratching an itch in your sleep.
Yeah.
I've done that with mosquito bites.
In summer, you're scratching and you wake up
scratching that mosquito bite.
And I also have to admit that I've experienced
not feeling like I wanna pick up my phone
because it's so rewarding, but just finding myself doing it.
Yes, of course.
Like I'm not gonna use this thing.
I'm not gonna use this thing.
And then just finding myself like, what am I doing here?
Sort of the, how did I get back here again?
And I know enough about brain function
to understand that we have circuits
that generate deliberate behavior
and we have circuits that generate reflexive behavior.
And one of the goals of the nervous system
is to make the deliberate stuff reflexive
so you don't have to make the decision
because decision-making is a very costly thing to do.
Decision-making of any kind.
So that does really help.
I wanna just try and weave together this dopamine puzzle,
however, because if by week,
so first phase of this 30 or 40-day detox,
it's like a dopamine fast, right?
Okay.
First 10 days are miserable.
Middle 10 days, the clouds are out.
There may be some shards of sunlight coming through.
And then all of a sudden, sun starts to come out.
It gets brighter and brighter.
Why is it then that people will relapse,
not just after getting fired from a job
or their spouse leaving them,
but when things are going really well?
Is it this unconscious mechanism?
Because I've seen this before, they have a great win.
I have a friend who's a really impressive creative.
I don't want to reveal any more than that.
And relapsed upon getting another really terrific opportunity
to create for the entire world.
And I was like, how can that happen?
But now I'm beginning to wonder,
was it the dopamine associated with that win
that opened the spigot on this dopamine system?
Because it happened in a phase
of a really great stretch of life.
Yeah, right.
Yeah, so you raised that great point about triggers, right?
And triggers are things that make us want
to go back to using our drug.
And the key thing about triggers, whatever they are,
is they also release a little bit of dopamine, right?
So just thinking about whatever the trigger is
that we associate with drug use,
or just thinking about drug use,
can already release this anticipatory dopamine,
this new little mini spike.
But here's the part that I think is really fascinating.
That mini spike is followed by a mini deficit state.
So it goes up and then it doesn't go back down to baseline.
It goes below baseline tonic levels.
And that's craving, right?
So that anticipation is immediately followed
by wanting the drug.
And it's that dopamine deficit state
that drives the motivation to go and get the drug.
So many people talk about dopamine
as not really about pleasure,
but about wanting and about motivation.
And so it is that deficit state
that then drives the locomotion to get it.
And earlier, your description of dopamine
being involved in the desire for more,
giving the sense of reward, but also movement,
I have to assume that those things
are braided together in our nervous system
for the specific intention of when you feel something good,
then you feel the pain, or maybe you don't notice it.
And then the next thing you know,
you're pursuing more of the thing that could deliver.
And I love the way you use the word braided together.
That's beautiful.
And let me also just say something
that I find also fascinating in my work with patients,
and I see this all the time.
There are people for whom bad life experiences,
loss in any form, stress in many different forms,
that's a trigger.
But there are absolutely people
for whom the trigger is things going well.
And the things going well
can be like the reward of the things going well,
but very often what it is
is the removal of the hypervigilant state
that's required to keep their use in check.
So it's this sense of, I wanna celebrate,
or I wanna, this reward happened,
I wanna put more reward on there.
And it's really, really fascinating
because when people come to that realization
about themselves, that they're most vulnerable
when things are going well,
that's really a valuable insight
because then they can put some things in place
or barriers in place or go to more meetings
or whatever it is that they do to protect themselves.
Along those lines, I have a friend, 40 years sober,
who was a severe drug and alcohol addict
from a very young age, really impressive person,
does a lot of important work
in the kind of at-risk youth community out in Hawaii.
And he said something to me.
He said, as former addicts often do,
they've got these great sayings,
but I think it fits very well with what you're describing.
He said, no matter how far you drive,
you're always the same distance from the ditch.
And I said, well, that's kind of depressing.
And he said, no, that's actually what gives me peace
because what would happen is for so many years
of relapsing and relapsing,
getting recovering and relapsing,
he felt like it was hopeless.
And then somehow conceptualizing
that the vigilance can never go away
instead of making him feel burdened,
it made him feel relieved.
So I often think about that statement,
no matter how far you drive,
you're always the same distance from the ditch
because in my mind, I conceptualize that as,
gosh, that's a tough way to drive down the road,
but actually on a road where you know where the ditch is
and where you know where the lane lines are,
it's actually a pretty nice drive.
It's when you don't know where the shoulder is
that you constantly have to be looking around.
So there's this, we're speaking now
in analogies and imagery and science,
but one of the things I find so incredible
about this community of 12-step,
and there are a variety of them,
are the communities that they create for themselves
and some of these sayings,
which I do believe link back to really
core biological mechanisms.
Yes, yes.
I do want to ask about those communities.
I have a question which might be a little bit controversial.
Great.
Which is, is it possible that people
who were addicted to drugs or alcohol
or some gambling or some other behavior
get addicted to the addiction community?
Because one thing that I think I observe over and over
is that there's some circuit in the brain of human beings
that has to tell you about the dream
they had the night before, for whatever reason.
There's another circuit that leads people to wake you up
if they themselves can't sleep.
I don't know what that circuit is.
I'm being facetious here.
But there does seem to also be a circuit
in the brain of addicts to discuss
and want to kind of talk about their recovery a lot.
And I mentioned this not to poke at them,
but rather the opposite,
because I think that one thing that is challenging,
at least for me and having friends
that have a propensity for drug or alcohol addiction,
not all of them, but certainly some of them,
is when they're talking about their recovery,
I feel like it's all they talk about.
This meeting, that meeting, that meeting.
How are we, so what I'm really asking here is,
is that can we become addicted to sobriety?
Right, so this is a great question.
And it links into some of the other things
we've been talking about having to do with
where do we settle out?
What is the way to live between pleasure and pain?
And I implied earlier that ultimately
we want a resilient balance
that's sensitive to pleasure and pain,
but that can easily restore homeostasis after we indulge,
even when we indulge greatly.
But the truth of the matter is that
people with severe addiction, I believe,
temperamentally want those extremes
and they're wired for that kind of intensity
that is more than just these slight adjustments
around the fulcrum, right?
It's like, they want the big highs and the big lows.
They'll say, great meeting.
Yeah, right.
They're like, that was such an amazing meeting.
Or they find a group, they find a group in a location.
Like this is almost an inside joke in those communities.
Again, I'm not reporting,
I'm not talking about a friend in quotes.
This isn't me reporting.
Well, they'll talk about how attractive people are
at a given meeting,
or how bonded they feel to people at a given meeting,
that the meetings themselves
become their own form of dopamine hit.
Yes, yes.
And again, I'm not being disparaging.
I just, I want to understand this.
Right, so yes, so a lot of times patients will say to me,
oh, you know, I don't want to go to AA, it's a cult.
And my response to that is because it's a cult
is exactly why it works, okay?
Because yes, it is much better for you to be addicted to AA
and to recovery than almost any other addiction
I could think of.
And we know from Rob Malenka's work,
who's here at Stanford,
that oxytocin is the hormone that's involved
in human pair bonding and relationships and love.
And it directly links to dopamine neurons
and causes the release of dopamine.
So yes, when we connect with other humans,
especially in a kind of transcendent spiritual way,
that's a huge dopamine hit.
And it does replace the dopamine that people get from drugs.
And for people who have this addiction temperament,
they need it on a more intense level.
They're not going to be generally satisfied
with kind of, you know, a sort of acquaintanceship, right?
They want that intensity of the intimacy that you get
with people when you're cathartically exposing,
you know, warts and all.
So yes, people can get addicted to recovery
and good for them, go for it, you know?
And of course this can be disruptive for friendships
and relationships where the one person is not in recovery.
Like you're going to so many meetings,
you're always talking about recovery, but you know what?
Much better than them being intoxicated, right?
I mean, so although you may tire of your friends
talking about their meetings all the time,
I'm sure you would rather have them do that
than, you know, be in their addiction, so.
Absolutely.
And this is now the second time
you've done this during this discussion,
but now I have empathy because the way you describe
their enthusiasm about meetings
is probably the way that people feel about me and your work.
And in neuroscience, I mean,
I've been getting up in front of the class
since I was eight years old
and talking about things I read over the weekend.
Now I just happen to have this thing called a podcast.
I've been doing it since I was little,
and it annoys a lot of people, right?
I've learned to suppress it a little bit.
Some people like it, but I'm poking fun at myself
just to say that I now can understand
that the way I feel about their reports
about yet another amazing meeting,
or there's a different form of this,
but there are some people for which
they just love intense experiences.
They're always like trying to pull me off to Bali
because they're talking about how sensual it is all the time.
I'm sure Bali is wonderful,
but there's this kind of ratcheting up.
It's like seeking Burning Man all year long.
I've never been to Burning Man,
no desire to go to Burning Man,
but inside of academia, I mean,
if I were to just turn the mirror at myself
inside of academia or here in Silicon Valley, work,
and the pursuit of more success,
even if money is kind of divorced from that,
sometimes it is, sometimes it isn't.
Academic work is for sake of pursuit of knowledge.
It sounds to me like the same mechanism.
In fact, it feels to me very much like the same mechanism.
So Andrew, here's what I love about you.
First of all, you're willing to bring your own flaws
and foibles to this conversation.
Well, they're everywhere.
Well, you know what?
It's wonderful.
And then you're really open and curious
and wanting to understand,
because I can't tell you how many people I have met
who really see addiction as some kind of otherness,
but the truth is we're all wired for addiction.
And if you're not addicted yet,
it's just, it's right around the corner.
Do you know what I mean?
Especially with the incredible panoply of new drugs
and behaviors that are out there.
So I love that you're willing to take a moment
and really try to understand this,
because it is, we can all relate,
and you're relating it to essentially your work addiction
is right and apt.
You just happen to be addicted to something
that is really socially rewarded.
You figured that out in an early age.
Oh, when I do X, Y, and Z, all these people go,
look at that smart kid or whatever it is.
For me, it made me feel safe.
Okay.
I felt like, yeah, I just felt like this,
and I pause there, because it's like peace.
I'm like, ah, I can relax for a moment.
When you're talking about neuroscience.
Or just when I feel like I'm on the right path,
and I'm onto something,
or if I see something that I'm excited about,
I'm like, I feel filled with, it must be dopamine.
I feel flooded with pleasure, literally from head to toe.
And then my next thought is, more.
So true, you're a true addict, you are.
You are, but you just got really,
you really got lucky with the fact
that what you're drawn to is adaptive, essentially.
And then your challenge is going to be
that your life doesn't get too out of balance
in the sense that you're 24-7 work,
and you don't stop and do some other things
or think about it.
And my life, admittedly, is somewhat asymmetric.
I mean, it has other components of physical health, et cetera,
but it is somewhat asymmetric, which is why I got a dog.
Although I talk about him an awful lot, so.
But the dog is good, because that draws you out of yourself
and a little bit away from the work.
But again, I think the key here is,
for people who feel like they've never experienced addiction
or they don't know anybody with addiction,
or if they do, they don't get it,
just think of that one thing
that is the most important thing in your life that you do
that gives you pleasure and meaning and purpose,
and then imagine if you couldn't do it.
Oh yeah, let's not talk about that.
Right.
Well, I appreciate the feedback,
and you can send me a bill at the end.
What is the most ridiculous-sounding addiction
that you've ever witnessed
that was actually a real addiction along these lines?
Because I think we all know the standard heroin pill.
You've been very, I should mention,
because it's important, your previous book,
and we will provide a link to that as well,
focused on the opioid crisis
and what we thought was medication.
It turned out to be just as bad, if not worse,
than a lot of so-called street drugs.
So we understand those, you know, gambling,
sex addiction, porn addiction, now video games.
We'll talk about social media a little bit more in depth,
but what's the most, like, wow,
I didn't realize people could get addicted to that.
Water.
Really?
Really, so I had a very lovely patient
who had a severe alcohol addiction,
and she got into recovery from her alcohol addiction
for many years, but she kind of had a sort of a polydipsia
or an urge to be drinking something a lot,
and so she drank a lot of water,
and slowly, over time, she realized
that if she drank enough water,
she could become hyponatremic and delirious
and be out of herself, which is-
You can die from it, right?
Right, which is, she just wanted to be out of her own head,
and so she would periodically,
intentionally overdose on water in order to,
I know it was so sad, so sad.
What happened to her?
She eventually took her own life.
Wow. Yeah, it was really-
That's rough.
She was a lovely woman.
She was so bright.
She had so many interests and passions,
and of course, it was very sad when she died,
but that was a wow to me.
It was like, wow, if you have this disease of addiction,
you can even get addicted to water.
Wow, and I think it just underscores
the generalizability of these circuits.
Right.
There isn't a brain circuit for addiction to water
that she happened to have.
There's a brain circuit for pleasure and pain
and addiction and water plugged into that circuit.
Right.
Wow, that's intense.
In your book, Dopamine Nation,
you also describe some amazing paths to recovery.
People that, you know, from reading it,
I won't say which ones and who,
because there's some great surprises in the book too,
both tragic and triumphant, as they say.
You've often described your patients as your heroes.
Yeah.
Yeah, tell us a little bit more about that.
You know, when you think about how hard it is
to give up a drug or a behavior that you're addicted to,
how much courage that takes and fortitude and discipline
and stick-to-it-iveness,
these people are really amazing people.
I mean, that's, I don't know that I could do it,
what they do, you know?
It's, and like, you know, we talked a little bit about,
you know, just the constant, ever-present urge to use,
even after sustained periods of abstinence for some people.
That's really, really hard.
And of course, then you double down on the shame
that they feel because of that urge,
even when their lives are so much better.
I mean, these people are really, really remarkable.
And you take their remarkable accomplishment,
and then you imagine the world that we live in now,
where we are constantly invited and tempted
and really bombarded with opportunities
to become addicted at every turn.
It's like peeling an itch everywhere.
Oh yeah, I mean, you can't escape it.
You know, you cannot escape it,
but you'll get an email in your inbox
inviting you to do X, Y, or Z.
And if you're addicted to that thing,
you know, you tried to like delete all your apps
and not go here, all of a sudden your work inbox,
you're, you know, you're getting those images, let's say,
really, really, really hard.
And yet these people find a way to do it.
I think it's absolutely amazing.
And they're really wise people.
They have so much wisdom to offer.
They've taught me a lot.
You know, as I talk about in my book,
I have my own addictions,
and I really just like took a page right out of their box.
Okay, what do I do now?
All right, what did this patient do?
Okay, I'm gonna try that.
It is an amazing community of people
that are very sage.
I wanted to just touch on something that you mentioned,
which is the shame.
You know, you can't go to a meeting
or talk to addicts without detecting
or hearing about like lies, shame, et cetera.
I heard you say in an interview with somebody else recently
that truth-telling and secrets are sort of
at the core of recovery.
And yeah, tell us more about that.
Yeah, so one of the things that I found really fascinating
about working with people in recovery
was how telling the truth,
even about the merest detail of their lives,
was central to their recovery.
And I became really curious about that.
Like, why would truth-telling be so important?
And of course, there is the obvious thing
that when people are in their addiction,
they're lying about using.
You know, so part of getting into recovery
is to stop lying to the people they care about
about their use.
But it's really more than that
because what people in recovery have taught me
is that it's not even just not lying about using drugs.
I have to not lie about anything.
I can't lie about why I was late to work this morning,
which we all do.
Oh, I hit traffic.
No, I didn't hit traffic.
I wanted to spend two more minutes reading the paper
drinking my coffee, right?
Or just lying about, you know,
I don't know where I had dinner.
Like, so people with addiction
will get into, you know, the lying habit
where they're lying about random stuff
because they're sort of in the habit of lying.
And how recovery is really about telling the truth,
you know, in all ways.
And so one of the things that I had a lot of fun with
in writing the book is sort of exploring
the neuroscience around why truth-telling is important
to leading a balanced life.
And we know like every religion since the beginning of time
is all about telling the truth.
Well, why, right?
And there's really interesting neuroscience behind it
that suggests that when we tell the truth,
we actually potentially strengthen
our prefrontal cortical circuits
and their connections to our limbic brain
and our reward brain.
And of course, these are the circuits that get disconnected
when we're in our addiction, right?
Our balance in our reward pathway, our limbic brain,
our emotion brain is doing one thing
and our cortical circuits are completely disengaged
from that ignoring what's happening,
which is easy to do because it's reflexive.
We don't need to think about that balance
for the balance to be happening,
but we have to re-engage those circuits,
anticipate future consequences, think through the drink,
you know, not just how am I gonna feel now if I use,
but how am I gonna feel tomorrow or six months from now?
And that telling the truth is in fact a way to do that,
to make these connections stronger.
And there, I talk about some studies in my book
that kind of indirectly show that.
So I find that really fascinating.
Plus just that like being open and honest with people
really does create very intimate connections
and those intimate connections create dopamine.
So we were talking a little bit about
how you know a bunch of people
who need like intensity in their lives.
For me, I need a lot of intensity in my human connections.
Like I'm really not interested in and bored by
and made anxious by casual interactions.
But you know, like having this kind of discussion with you
that's very intense and also intimate and self-disclosing
is very rewarding for me.
So that's an important source of dopamine.
Thank God I became a psychiatrist.
Yeah, absolutely.
Like I can't disclose all my stuff,
but I am quite transparent with my patients,
which is a slightly unorthodox.
But you know, when I think it's right,
I'm also transparent with them.
So that's, you know, that's a source of dopamine too,
when we're honest and we disclose
and that you think people are going to run away from you
if you tell them about all like your weird neuroses,
but really they don't.
What they're like is, oh, thank God,
I'm not the only one, right?
Well, what I love about,
I love many things about your book.
I read it in one sweep.
Oh, thank you.
And I was like, wow, is I was pleasantly surprised,
but I was like, wow, she's really opening up in this book
from the very beginning.
And I don't want to give it away,
but it's, yeah, you're very open where it's appropriate.
And also I think that this question about truth telling,
I always think about like, tell the truth,
be, you know, a hundred percent about the truth,
but there's also this element about,
do you report previous lies, right?
Like, what about prior behavior?
And I'm fascinated by this,
because to me, telling the truth has many facets,
but the three sides of this thing in my mind are,
one is reporting everything accurately.
The other is what do you withhold,
what do you not withhold, right?
Because some people will say,
tell the truth or at least don't lie.
That's sort of a-
Lies of omission.
That's a lies of omission, lies of omission.
And then there's the, what I have to assume for most people
is a small to enormous batch of things
that they lied about in the past
that still thread into the future.
So how important is it for the addict
or the every person really to,
because it sounds like cultivating the circuitry
between prefrontal cortex and the dopamine system
would be great for anybody,
since we're all addicts, everyone should do it.
But in all seriousness,
it sounds like a good thing for everybody to do.
How much work needs to be done on all the priors,
all the stuff we've hidden?
I mean, not me, but all the stuff that everybody else
has hidden.
Yeah, so the steps of the 12 steps of Alcoholics Anonymous,
a good number of those steps are about that very thing,
the past, the ways that we've harmed people in the past.
And the fourth step is about making amends
by admitting the ways in which that we've contributed
to harming others.
And it is a really big piece of recovery.
So how important, so for people with addiction,
it's really, really important to go back and make amends.
And the key idea there is you just go back
and you apologize and you don't have to get
any particular kind of response
or you don't need to be forgiven.
It's the act itself of apologizing about the ways
in which we've harmed or lied to people in the past
that is cathartic and renewing and allows us
to kind of shed this skin and be new in our lives
and begin again, sort of absolved of past sins, so to speak.
So it is really important.
Are there situations when it's maybe not a good idea
because of that person or the nature?
Sure, there are always gonna be,
it doesn't have to be like,
we're talking about not like Kant's idea about like,
never lie, but robbers in your house and you're stowaway.
You can't lie even about that.
It's like, no, there are probably situations where-
Absolutely, for sake of other people's safety,
children's safety, sure.
I mean, you can think of a million scenarios,
but in general, when we're taking stock,
because I don't know about you,
but I have a lot of regrets and guilt
about a lot of things in my life
and they kind of haunt me.
It's meant to all have nightmares, right?
And I think that's true for most people.
I mean, I occasionally will meet somebody who's like,
I don't have any regrets about it.
I'm like, wow, I cannot relate to that at all.
So this idea of catharsis and well,
I mean, in the 12 steps,
it's telling God or your higher power,
telling another human being
the ways in which you've wronged others,
considering your own character defects
and how those have contributed.
To me, that's a really important piece
and something that we don't do enough in our current culture,
especially in psychiatry, frankly,
where there's a lot of eternally empathizing
with patients, but not a whole lot of likes going,
well, you know, actually you kind of messed that up
or like that was really bad on you, you know?
And in my work, I don't necessarily use that language,
but patients may say like,
I really feel badly about this thing.
I'll be like, yeah, I get it.
I understand that you feel.
Guilt is a, there's a circuit for that too.
Right, and it's important, right?
And it's also important to recovery
and to not becoming addicted,
experiencing a certain amount of appropriate shame
for things that we have done
and feeling the pain that comes with shame,
which is an incredibly painful emotion, right?
And I think that may be the one
that we all try to avoid more than any other
is like that shame of not being liked
or not being accepted or not being celebrated.
Or that the thing that we did is really despicable.
Right, it's really, yeah, like,
oh my God, I did that horrible thing, right, right.
And then, so, I mean, I've done horrible things
that I haven't gone back and said,
I did this horrible thing,
but maybe I've tried to pay it forward.
Like I've told my kids, you know, when I was younger,
I did this horrible thing and it still haunts me.
So if you're ever tempted to do something like what I did,
you might think about my situation.
So, you know, some kind of way,
but I think wrestling with that is important.
I think it's a really important element to all this.
And there's not, I love that there's neuroscience
being done on truth-telling and the value of truth-telling.
I think if I were to predict a new and truly exciting area
that people are going to be really curious about
and in this huge sphere we call neuroscience,
I hope they'll continue to do more work.
Also speaks, I'm so glad to hear
that's happening here at Stanford.
No, that's, well, the literature that I look at
isn't Stanford work, but there's work.
There might be people at Stanford.
Regardless of where it's happening,
more of that and all the rest, please.
I want to ask you about using drugs to treat drug addiction.
These days, there's a growing interest
or at least discussion about Ibogaine,
people going down, going out of country,
because I think it's still illegal here or is illegal here,
going out of country to, I don't know,
either inject it or smoke it or whatever it is,
or people going and doing ayahuasca journeys or MDMA,
which is still an illegal drug in this country,
but there are clinical trials.
There are people on this campus doing experimental studies.
I don't know of clinical trials,
but at Johns Hopkins there are clinical trials, et cetera.
So this is a vast area, right?
Different chemistries for different drugs
and different purposes,
but the rationale, as I understand it,
is take people who are in a pattern of addiction,
launch them into a experience
that's also chemical and extreme,
often of the extreme serotonin and or extreme dopamine type.
So MDMA, ecstasy, for instance, tons of serotonin dumped,
tons of dopamine dumped, how neurotoxic,
if neurotoxic, debatable, et cetera, et cetera,
not a topic for now, but a lot.
And then somehow that extreme experience
wrapped inside of a supported network in there,
whether or not there's just someone there
or whether or not they're actively working through something
with the patient, is supposed to eject the person
into a life where drug use isn't as much of interest.
This violates, at a rash, purely rational level,
this violates everything we've talked about
in terms of dopamine biology.
It would, if this arrangement is the way I described it,
cause more addiction, is anything but a dopamine fast,
it's a dopamine feast.
So we hear about successful transitions through this,
at least anecdotally, and maybe some clinical say,
what is going on, what is going on?
It doesn't make any sense to me.
Yeah.
Yeah, so I think it's good that you're skeptical.
I think we all should be skeptical.
Having said that, there are clinical studies showing,
and these are small studies and they're short duration,
small number of subjects, but taking people, for example,
who are addicted to alcohol and then having them
have this, let's say, psychedelic experience
in a very controlled setting.
So either typically it's a high dose psilocybin
or three dose, as I saw it for the MAP study of MDMA,
of ecstasy.
Those seem to be the kind of bread and butter
of this kind of work.
But the thing to really keep in mind is that
this is completely interwoven with regular psychotherapy
and that these are highly selected individuals.
And clinical trials.
Right, right.
We're referring to legal clinical trials.
And so I think the metaphor that helps me think about this
is there are many ways to the top of the mountain
and these are sort of like taking the gondola
instead of walking up.
It's sort of, instead of doing like a year of psychoanalysis
where you're sitting on the couch every week,
reflecting on your life, it's a condensed version
of psychoanalysis or psychotherapy plus, you know, MDMA,
which gets you there faster.
Creates the intimacy presumably because of this.
Well, I think the main thing that happens
when it's beneficial is it just allows the person
to get outside of their own head
and look at their lives on a much broader sweep
and to consider themselves not mired in the, you know,
quotidian sort of details of their life,
but rather as a human on the large planet earth
in the vast universe.
So I think it takes, it's like when it works,
it's a transformational experience
because it gives the person another lens
through which to view their life, their lives,
which I think for some people is positive and powerful
because they can come back from that and be like,
oh my gosh, I care about my family
and I want X, Y, or Z for them
and I realize that my continuing to drink
is not going to, you know, achieve that.
So it's almost like a spiritual or values-based.
So I think it can be very powerful,
but having said that, I truly am quite skeptical
because, you know, addiction is a chronic relapsing
and remitting problem.
It's hard for me to imagine that there's something
that works very quickly short-term
that's going to work for a disease
that's really long lasting.
Yeah, the two addicts I know
that did MDMA-assisted psychotherapy
as part of this thing both got worse.
Yeah.
But the people I know who had severe trauma,
who did this, who took this approach,
seemed to be doing better.
Okay, interesting.
And so I think that the discussion as we hear it now
is just sort of psychedelics, which is a huge category
that includes many different drugs
and compounds with different effects.
And we hear about trauma and addiction lumped together
and I think that I'm a splitter, not a lumper,
as we say in science, and I think it's going to be important
for people to know that this is definitely not
a one-size-fits-all kind of thing,
but it sounds like it may have some utility
under certain conditions.
Yeah, I think so.
I think I'm trying to be very open-minded
about its potential utility for certain individuals,
but I can tell you in my clinical work,
what is a very concerning unintended consequence
of this narrative is I have a lot of people
who are looking for some kind of spiritual awakening
who on their own, not in the context
of any kind of therapeutic psychological work,
microdose or wanna try psilocybin or MDMA
with a friend or wherever so they can have
this spiritual experience that they can figure out
their lives, that's a disaster
and almost never works out well.
And I've then had people who literally,
supposedly you can't get addicted to psychedelics
because something with the biochemistry,
which I don't fully understand
because it doesn't make any sense to me,
but I have patients clinically who definitely are addicted
to MDMA, to microdosing.
So that's very concerning to me
because Pollan's, How to Change Your Mind,
I respect that work, but on the other hand,
it's penetrated the culture.
Michael Pollan's book.
Yeah, yeah.
Well, and I don't know him,
and so I don't have a problem taking a stance.
So I'll just say my stance on that is the narrative
of popular authors can expand and wick out so fast
that pretty soon people are essentially
taking their mental health into their own hands.
And I actually have great optimism for this business
of clinical use of psychedelics, including MDMA.
Matthew Johnson at Johns Hopkins
is doing fabulous work on this.
And there are others too, of course,
but those are controlled settings.
And the pharmacology is being tuned up.
And one thing that I think is coming,
there are several papers published recently
in great journals like Nature and Science, et cetera,
where there are scientists who are removing
the hallucinogenic components of these drugs
and finding that they still have the antidepressant effects.
And so the experience of a psychedelic
and the long-term effects of the psychedelic
might actually be dissociable.
And so I, again, and I'm always careful to say
I'm neither for something or against it.
I just think that treading carefully is what's important.
I agree with you.
And I can just tell you that the downstream effect
for the average person, many of whom present in our clinic,
is that they've misconstrued the data
on the use of psychedelics for mental health conditions
to this idea that they're safe
or that anybody can take them in any circumstance
and have this kind of awakening.
And that's not what the data show, right?
The data are these highly controlled settings.
You know, carefully selected patients.
So that's my worry, you know.
Sure.
And I'm going to be sitting down with Matthew Johnson
at some point, and we'll discuss this.
And I think that that care and that cocoon
of real clinical care does seem to be an important component.
Oh, well, I'm glad we could touch on it.
And, you know, I'm sure I'll get a bunch of comments
telling me that, you know, but I think it is important
to explore things from all sides, and that's what we do
as scientists.
And if Michael Pollan wants to chat, we can do that too.
That's fine.
I very much enjoyed the book, actually.
But I think that people run with ideas.
That's right.
They don't walk with them, they sprint.
Right, yeah.
There are a couple other things I just want to touch on,
but they all relate to social media.
Okay.
You were featured in The Social Dilemma.
It was a powerful movie.
I think many people avoided seeing that movie
because it reflects back on us just how addicted we all are
and how manipulated we all are.
Yes.
But it doesn't seem to have changed behavior much.
I have to say that the movie changed my understanding
and my perception, but not my behavior too much.
If we look at addiction as a maladaptive thing,
something that's making our lives worse
or us less functional at work and in relationships,
I could imagine a version of social media
where it's making me more connected.
I mean, this is a podcast after all.
I post videos.
This will show up on YouTube
and elements of it on Instagram as well.
So much like sugar or other things,
I have to imagine that we need to regulate,
not necessarily eliminate this behavior.
So I want to talk about what that looks like.
And I want to talk about what you've referred to
as this narcissistic preoccupation
that social media is creating,
that we are all far more keenly aware of how we look
and how we sound and how we are being perceived
than we were 10 years ago.
Right.
So first of all, social media,
how addicting is it really?
And what is healthy social media behavior?
So the first message I would want to get across
about social media is that it really is a drug
and it's engineered to be a drug.
And it's based on potency, quantity, variety,
the bottomless bowls, the likes,
the way that it's enumerated, all of that,
which doesn't mean that we can't use it,
but we need to be very thoughtful about the way we use it,
just like we need to be thoughtful
about the way we use any drug.
And so that means with intention
and in advance planning our use, right,
and trying to use it as a really awesome tool
to potentially connect with other people
and not to be used by it or get lost in it.
And of course, people are going to come
with different propensities for addiction to any drug.
And that's true for social media too.
Some people will have no problem using it in moderation
or using it in a way that's adaptive.
And other people will immediately get sucked in.
And the key thing about getting addicted
is when it's happening, nobody who's getting addicted
thinks they're getting addicted, right?
Let's face it.
It's only after the fact that we go,
whoops, what was that about?
Well, remember texting and driving?
There were all these books about texting and driving
how terrible it was.
Even the governments have largely given up.
You see these billboards, like don't text and drive
or any text can wait or not worth dying for,
but everybody's texting and driving.
Right, and if you look at young people today, teenagers,
I mean, they're basically cybernetically enhanced.
The phone is there.
It's like they're talking to you
and texting 12 friends at the same time.
And there's no stopping it.
I mean, the genie is out of the bottle.
We're not going back.
So we do need to figure out how to make this tool,
something that's gonna be good for us
and not ultimately harmful.
And I don't have all the answers
by any stretch of the imagination,
but I do think some of the wisdom that we have learned
from using other drugs also applies to social media,
which is to say that we have to, again,
put barriers in place that allow us to remain in control
of our use, which means not too much,
not too often, not too potent.
Do you think in going back to this idea
of the unit of the day being a good tractable unit,
a manageable unit of time for most people,
so you're saying in advance,
so allocating two hours in which you're going
to allow yourself to have free reign use of the phone
and all its apps and all its things,
or even more restricted than that,
meaning, okay, I'm only gonna allow myself 30 minutes a day
to post and comment, and then that's a closeout completely.
Yeah, so I think it depends on the person
and it's sort of a combination.
We talked earlier about having an itch
and scratching yourself at night.
We've gotten to a point with smartphones,
people are pulling them out
and they are utterly unconscious of doing so.
Pulling them out, a couple texts, a couple,
they don't know they're doing it.
I have a friend who works and delivers babies,
and many pregnant mothers won't actually deliver
without their phone in hand,
and this used to be the hand
that was connected to their spouse.
This may be a comment on spouses more than on phones,
but it sounds like it's kind of a security blanket.
Right, like a transitional object, yeah.
Actually, that reminds me, you've referred to the phone.
I think it's the phone, but maybe it's our online persona
or ourselves as we've become sort of infantile
in our need for it.
It's like a baby in a bottle.
And so I do wonder if we have regressed,
and I do think we've regressed a bit
in terms of our online behavior,
our inability to act like,
I always thought an adult was somebody
that couldn't control their behavior.
That's the difference between a baby and an adult.
You don't have to be a developmental neurobiologist
for very long to understand that a young organism
can't control its behavior and an older one can.
So to me, a mature organism, mature in years,
organism that can't control its behavior is a baby.
It's an immature version of itself.
And there's neuroscience to support that statement.
I look at my own behavior with the phone sometimes,
and I think, I'm a grown man.
Like, what is the problem here, right?
I don't eat baby food,
but I'm acting like a baby with the phone, all right?
In the sense that I'm reflexively picking it up.
I'm not being intentioned and deliberate with it.
Do I need a full 30 days, Anna?
So, yeah, as you know,
that's my recommended full 30 days to reset.
If you're severely addicted, I recommend the 30 days,
but if you're just a little bit addicted, like most of us,
you probably don't need 30 days.
In fact, a single day not only would be challenging,
but probably maybe sufficient.
My phone is off for substantial segments of the day.
Okay, that's great.
And it drives other people crazy.
People expect me to respond, but I don't care.
I really don't.
And I actually take a little bit of pleasure
in the fact that, well, because I think the point
I'm trying to make is the right one,
which is that it's not just right for me, but like why?
I don't see a clause on text messages or emails that say,
must be responded to within X amount of time or else.
So I take the liberty of replying when I'm able to.
Yeah, that's right.
Or want to.
Right, but which touches on one of the big challenges
about social media is that as more and more of us
are spending more and more time on social media,
we're divesting our libidinous energies, et cetera,
from real life interactions.
So that means even when we want to choose to not be online
connecting, we go outside and there's no there there, right?
There's nobody else there.
So I think our collective challenge,
and it should be our mission, is to make sure
that we are preserving and maintaining offline ways
to connect with each other.
Because if we don't do that, then we'll be very lonely,
right, if we were not online.
But if you have a tribe of folks that you can be with,
none of whom are on their phones while you're together
for that discrete amount of time,
then it's wonderful and liberating and nobody's distracted.
And I think that's really the key.
And I think young people are figuring that out.
They're trying to create these spaces or try to,
let's say instead of doing a dopamine fast by yourself,
do it with your friends, right?
Then there's the FOMO is less, the fear of missing out
because, oh, you're all doing the dopamine fast together.
So these are some of the tricks that we can come up with.
But-
I like that.
Yeah, okay, good.
I don't allow, I have a home gym and I love working out.
I just enjoy it and I always have.
And I don't allow my phone in my gym anymore.
And I live in an area where I don't get any reception
like two meters outside my door.
So all my dog walks now are just,
and they were boring as hell.
I also have a bulldog, he doesn't like to walk.
It's really slow.
And it was so boring for a while
because I was so used to taking calls while I walk
and it's super efficient.
Why wouldn't I do that?
The walks now are some of my favorite part of the day
because, and if the phone were,
if I were to get a call on one of those
and they brought reception to the area,
I would be very dismayed.
So I can attest to this.
And I don't think I'm a phone addict,
but I do put work into regulating my phone.
Yeah, so this is the key.
You have to, with intention,
prior to being in that situation,
think of literal physical and metacognitive barriers
that you can put between yourself and your phone
or whatever your drug is
to create these intentional spaces
where you're not constantly interrupting yourself,
essentially, and distracting yourself.
Because I really do think,
I think we talked just before we started with the interview,
we're losing the ability to have a sustained thought, right?
I mean, we get so far
and then you get to that point in the thought
where it's a little bit hard to know what's coming next.
And it's very easy to check your phone or check your email
or look something up on the internet.
And then you never get that opportunity
to finish that thought,
which is really the source of creative energy
and an original thought, right?
You're not just reacting to what's coming at you.
And something that could contribute to the world.
That's right.
I'm a big believer that you're either consuming
or you are creating.
And there is, I should mention, it's important.
I do believe in neutral time.
I think sleep is great.
I'm a big proponent of sleep
and I've talked a lot about it on the podcast.
I care a lot about sleep.
And not just for sake of performance.
I actually just really like sleep.
I think that being a constant consumer
of visual information
and information of all kinds can be a problem.
But there's some really great sources
of information on the internet.
And I certainly benefit from the fact
that those channels exist.
Narcissistic preoccupation.
Am I a narcissist?
First of all, there's healthy-
Or is the fact that I asked, does that take me out of,
would a narcissist ever ask that question?
Oh yes, a highly sophisticated narcissist
would know to do that.
I'm very sophisticated.
So there's healthy narcissism,
which means that we all invest our personal energies
into things that we care about.
And if our competence in that arena is threatened,
we would all experience a narcissistic injury
and that's normal and healthy.
But we are living in a narcissistic culture.
I mean, that's not news.
This preoccupation with individual achievement
and individual self-worth and individual self-confidence.
And I think all of that is just fueled by social media
where we're not just seeing ourselves,
but we're seeing people's reactions to ourselves
and every single thing we say or do,
we get likes and this and that.
It's really insidious.
And it contributes, I think,
ultimately to a lot of personal shame
because we're not really meant to be individuals
bouncing around in the universe.
We're social animals.
And we're probably generally happiest
even for natural contrarians among us
when we're part of a tribe, right?
And if we do too much to kind of separate ourselves
from that tribe, I think that the brain's natural
and instinctive corrective mechanism against that
is self-loathing and shame.
So it's so ironic because the culture tells us
if we just achieve more, we'll like ourselves more.
But the truth is actually the opposite
that I think when people get these pinnacles
of personal achievement,
you have things like the imposter syndrome or whatever.
Where you just, we're at Stanford
after a lot of high achievers here, right?
Some phenomenal, amazing people like yourself
and other colleagues of mine that just, I'm always in awe.
It's just amazing.
The mean has shifted so high.
And also people who have amazing paths to get here
coming from very little accomplishing so much.
But it's also the pressure, right?
The way that this career was described to me
the day I got my job was one colleague of mine,
the late Ben Barra said, welcome to schizophrenia
because you're never going to be able to complete anything
without getting interrupted.
That was partially true, although I've created buffers.
And the other one, very successful scientist,
a member of the National Academy, et cetera, said to me,
just remember it's pinball.
You never win.
The best you can do is just keep playing.
And I thought, wow, okay, okay.
And then you just go.
But I think that as we achieve more,
not just academics, of course, but as anyone achieves more,
there's the relishing and the accomplishment.
There's often the desire for more,
but there's also the pressure of,
well, now I have to do this for the next 30 years
even though I love it.
It's the pressure of, well, if the mountain is this high,
then how do I get here and here and here?
And then you start shoveling more dirt on
so you can keep climbing.
And it's a lot of work.
And I think that the perception of success
is that there's a roar of the crowd and you cruise.
You don't cruise.
They just give you more to do.
Or you give yourself more to do.
Well, what I think is, at least in my life experience,
and I've heard this from other people as well,
it's that prize that we're going for
that if we get it, is so unsatisfying.
And it's the prize that we never imagined
that we kind of go, well, how did that happen?
But gee, that feels good.
And so I'm very, what's the-
It's like a mirage in the one case.
And it's like a, yeah, it's on the one,
it's almost like dopamine can create these mirages
that there's some place there.
That's right.
If I just, it's that pot of gold, right?
Constant dopamine.
Right, right, that's right, that's right.
And I think this really, I think,
is related to our discussion earlier
about this taking it one day at a time
or paying attention to that 24-hour period
in your environment.
I am absolutely fascinated by the ways
in which we accumulate success when we do that,
totally independent of the desire for success.
It's really process-oriented.
It's like, where am I today?
How can I make today a good and meaningful day,
a little bit better or as good as some other days I've had?
Constantly tweaking and experimenting
with this experiment that we call our human existence.
And when we do that in a way that's authentic
and paying attention and value-driven,
whatever our values are informed by,
it is very, very interesting how those days,
again, accumulate and you find,
well, I guess I contributed something of value there,
but I wasn't trying to do that.
I think that's really,
I mean, what I'm so amazed by is like,
20 years ago when I went to Stanford Medical School,
25 years ago, I was happy to just be a good doctor.
I was like, I guess I'm just gonna try to figure out
how to be a good doctor and I'm here to learn that.
And now I see these medical students and they're wonderful.
They're brilliant and they're well-intentioned, all that.
But they're like, how can I write the great American novel,
do my startup, go to Africa, apply for that grant?
It's like, really?
I was just trying to learn how to be a doctor.
And as you say, it's a lot of pressure on them.
And it's also kind of a weird leapfrogging
of the real way to accomplish something.
Which isn't about like, oh, how can I accomplish something?
It's like, what can I do today that would be of service?
And then finding that of trying to be of service
and not really going for recognition
can sometimes lead to what people call success.
Although that wasn't what you were aiming for.
And it's all the more beautiful
when it's not what you're aiming for.
Oh, so much better, so much better.
I'm a big believer that when one can align their compulsion
with some greater good, a service to humanity
or the planet or animals, whatever it is,
that that's where the really good stuff emerges.
Because there's a lot of reciprocity there.
The world starts to, you're supporting the world
and then it starts to support you
in a way that feels very fluid.
And that comes back.
And I mean, that speaks to your generosity to me,
vis-a-vis my book.
And I have to say-
Well, I love the book.
There's like, we're not in a business deal, folks.
It's just purely that I heard Anna lecture in my course.
I wanted to learn more about dopamine.
She taught me, I asked her if she would come on the podcast.
Turned out, she wrote this amazing book.
She sent me a man's copy of the book.
I read it in one sweep.
It's incredible and I love it.
So just like the eight-year-old version of me,
now the 45 version of myself,
I can't stop blabbing about the things I love.
Well, it's awesome, but I have to say,
I have been surprised by your generosity.
It's not something I've encountered frequently at Stanford,
which is a wonderful place.
But there is a general sense that if I give away
to somebody else, I've lost something,
which is not the right way to think about it,
not how you are, and also not how the world works.
Because when we give away to other people,
we get back so much more, but it takes a long time
and it might not come through that path.
I never think about reciprocity.
But I was weaned by good advisors.
That's very nice.
I think I just sort of got drilled into me
that the more you give, the better your immediate life is.
But I also don't have a long-term vision.
I'm just excited about the book.
I'm excited that people are learning
about the brain and dopamine.
I have to admit, having grown up in neuroscience,
essentially, I did not understand that pleasure and pain
were orchestrated the way that they are.
I'm very mindful of it now.
And it's changed a number of my behaviors.
I know a number of people are going to have questions
and want to get in contact with you.
You are not on social media.
That's correct.
Yes.
You are true to your ideology.
That's great.
And the reason for that is just,
I wouldn't be able to control myself.
I mean, that really would be my drug.
People are my drug.
Intimacy is my drug, and I wouldn't be able to manage it.
And so it was just easier for me to not do it at all
rather than try to moderate it.
Well, the book, as you mentioned before
and as I can attest to, is it has a certain intimacy.
People get to know you through the book.
So definitely check out the book.
If you have questions about the book, et cetera,
you're welcome to send them my way.
I will buffer you from all those questions.
I'll filter them.
Anna, Dr. Lemke, I should be a formal,
forgive me, I've been referring to you
the whole way through because we're colleagues,
but thank you so much for sharing this information.
And I know I learned a ton and I know everyone else
is going to learn a lot more about addiction
and the good side of dopamine.
That's right.
Thank you for having me.
It's been really, really great to talk with you.
Great, thank you.
Thank you for joining me for my discussion
with Dr. Anna Lemke.
I hope you enjoyed it as much as I did.
Please be sure to check out her new book,
Dopamine Nation, Finding Balance in the Age of Indulgence.
You can pre-order it on Amazon
or any places where books are sold.
It's an absolutely fascinating and engaging read
all about addiction and dopamine.
If you're learning from and or enjoying this podcast,
please follow us on YouTube by subscribing
to the Huberman Lab channel.
In addition, you can subscribe to the podcast
on Apple and Spotify.
And on Apple, you have the opportunity to leave us
up to a five-star review.
If you have comments or suggestions for topics
for future podcasts, please put those
in the comment section below this episode on YouTube.
In addition, we have a Patreon.
That's patreon.com slash Andrew Huberman.
And there you can support us at any level that you like.
Please also check out our sponsors
that we mentioned at the beginning of the episode.
That's a terrific way to support our podcast
and our ability to continue to bring you
zero cost to consumer information
about science and science-related tools.
And last but not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
We'll see you in the next episode of the Huberman Lab.